# in-toto Community Meetings 2020

## 12/01/2020 Meeting

### Agenda
* Introductions
* The first 2021 roadmap review is due at the end of December, and we'll be going over the work our contributors have put in this period
* Release of in-toto 1.0
* Acceptance of ITE-4
* Updates on new, standalone signing-spec for use in in-toto and TUF
* Proposed ITE-6

### Attendees
* kpcyrd (rebuilderd / Arch Linux?)
* Christian Rebischke
* Aditya Sirish (NYU)
* Reza Curtmola (NJIT)
* Sangat (NJIT)
* Tom Hennen (Google)
* James Higgins-Thomas (Fiserv)
* Lukas Pühringer (NYU)
* Santiago Torres-Arias (Purdue)
* Hammad Afzali (NJIT)
* Gerard Borst
* Kristel Fung
* Mark Lodato (Google)
* Andy Martin (ControlPlane)
* Nenad Dedic (Google)
* Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy (Datadog)
* Kay Williams (Microsoft)
* Lois Anne DeLong (NYU)

### Notes
- Santiago gives overview of ongoing work in in-toto subprojects
  - Kristel has been working on an [in-toto/Grafeas translation layer](https://github.com/in-toto/totoify-grafeas/pull/3)
  - Christian has been working on the [in-toto go implementation](https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang/), which might be interesting for [kubesec](https://github.com/controlplaneio/kubesec) folks. (Santiago briefly explains what kubsec is) Engineering resources for future in-toto-golang development are yet tbd.
  - Similarly, the [in-toto rust implementation](https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-rs) could use help. Santiago considers replacing the crypto provider, which seems to be a requirement for  [rebuilderd](https://github.com/kpcyrd/rebuilderd). kpcyrd will verify that. (you can ping kpcyrd on `archlinux-reproducible@irc.freenode.org`)

- Lukas talks about 1.0.0 release of the in-toto python reference implementation, which is above all a commitment to the maturity and stability of the API. It also adds more intuitive key management interfaces and better documentation.

- Aditya talks about advances in ITE-4 since the last meeting. It has become accepted and the [CNAB](https://cnab.io/) community has started to experiment with it.

- One of the next steps for the reference implementation will be to add custom resolvers for [ITE-4](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/4/README.adoc) resources.

- Santiago mentions that we will likely start with resolvers for GitHub activities, like PRs, issues, etc.

- Gerard points out non-persistence of these resources and thus changing hashes. (This issue is also captured in [ITE-4#Dynamic-data..])(https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/4/README.adoc#dynamic-data-in-remote-abstract-entities))

- Santiago and Gerard talk about resolvers for docker images or in a more generalized form [OCI](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec) images, and the possibility of using the hash that is already in the name

- Aditya talks about the history of the signing specification... how the Google/Binary Authorization team proposed a change to the in-toto signature wrapper metadata format (see [ITE-5](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/13)), how this was run by the [TUF community](https://hackmd.io/jdAk9rmPSpOYUdstbIvbjw?view#1020-Meeting), and has now become a stand-alone [specification](https://github.com/secure-systems-lab/signing-spec/blob/master/specification.md), to be adopted by both TUF and in-toto.

- Mark gives overview of signing-spec key features:
  - canonicalization and parsing of untrusted data no longer required
  - content type is can be read without parsing the payload but is also part of the authenticated message
  - envelope content type makes it easier to use other formats than json (cbor, protobuf, etc. ), and to support different versions of formats

- Kay asks how this metadata format changes relate to SBOM work and Santiago explains upgrade paths and that a lot of thought was put into backwards compatibility

- Santiago gives overview of [ITE-6 - Generalized link format](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/15), also proposed by the Google / Binary Authorization team. Feedback from the community is welcome.

- Santiago and kpcyrd discuss delegation of trusted keys with sublayouts to make changing keys easier on different levels of the trust hierarchy.

## 09/15/2020 Meeting

### Agenda
* Roadmaps for 2021 [1][2]
* Releasing in-toto reference implementation 1.0.0
* Report from KubeCon Europe
* Further development of in-toto-golang through GSoC [3]
* ITE-2, 3, 4 updates and adoptions [4][5][6]
* in-toto + rebuilderd for Reproducible Builds and the birth of a rust implementation of in-toto [7][8]

[1] https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/ROADMAP.md
[2] https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto/blob/develop/ROADMAP.md
[3] https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang/pull/56
[4] https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/2/README.adoc
[5] https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/3/README.adoc
[6] https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/4/README.adoc
[7] https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-rs
[8] https://github.com/kpcyrd/rebuilderd/pull/22

### Attendees
- Aditya Sirish (NYU)
- Santiago Torres-Arias (Purdue)
- Lois Anne DeLong (NYU)
- Wiktor Kozlik (Google)
- Ivan Pedrazas (ControlPlane)
- James Higgins-Thomas (Fiserv)
- Justin Cappos (NYU)
- Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy (Datadog)
- Brandon Lum (IBM Research)
- Mark Lodato (Google)
- Joshua Lock (VMWare)
- Hammad Afzali (NJIT)
- Jack (ControlPlane)
- Sangat (NJIT)
- Reza Curtmola (NJIT)
- Kay Williams (Microsoft)
- Kate Stewart (SPDX / Linux Foundation)

### Notes

#### Roadmaps for 2021 

https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/ROADMAP.md
https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto/blob/develop/ROADMAP.md

* The new roadmap covers August 2020-August 2021 and was published on August 11th.
* The roadmap does NOT include a release announcement of v1.0.0 of the Reference Implementation, as it was decided that a few outstanding issues still needed to be resolved. The plan now is to release version 1.0.0. by the end of the year
* Accomplishments from the last roadmap included work on the Java Implementation and Jenkins plugin.
* Work for the year ahead will be focused on more stable implementations, and will include upgrading from a "Silver" to a "Gold" rating under the Core Infrastructure Initiative's best practices badge. 
* Lastly, the authors look to ensure that the changes outlined in the three current draft ITEs can be integrated with existing technologies.
*  Since ITEs 2 and 3 relate to TUF integration, we will make sure we have a tighter testing harness with co-dependent libraries (e.g., securesystemslib). In addition we will make sure common elements, such as public key components and signatures, can be cross-verifiable by both implementations.

#### Report from KubeCon Europe

* in-toto was mentioned in two talks at KubeCon Europe, building interest abroad.

#### in-toto-golang

* Christian Rebischke, a Google Summer of Code intern on the in-toto project, did some significant work on implementing a fully-fledged in-toto runlib in Go. Most of his contributions are summarized here: https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang/pull/56.
* He also described his experience over the summer in two blog posts you can read at https://shibumi.dev/posts/google-summer-of-code-2020/ and https://www.cncf.io/blog/2020/10/07/gsoc-spotlight-my-google-summer-of-code-experience-at-cncf-in-2020/.
* Furthermore he proposed a few other PRs after his GSoC internship like multi hash support, Github Actions CI and gitignore like exclude patterns.

#### ITEs

There are three ITEs currently in draft stage.

##### ITE-4

https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/4/README.adoc

This ITE changes the requirement that the identifier for each in-toto artifact must be its path in the filesystem. Instead, it would allow the artifact to have a generic Unique Resource Identifier (URI) in-toto specification (URI) that can be resolved to some external resource within the supply chain. 

Aditya Sirish is spearheading efforts on this ITE. 

* Now that it is a draft, Aditya is calling for input from the community to identify any weaknesses,
* A test prototype https://github.com/adityasaky/in-toto/tree/ite-4-cnab-resolver was developed for the workflow laid out in Use Case 3 for CNAB bundles. But, the authors are looking for volunteers to write prototypes for other applications. 
* In addition to CNAB, other use cases cited as motivation for ITE-4 were the use of identifiers in SPDX documents, and a desire to provide attestations to the Pull Requests and Issues on GitHub. 
* Proposal still holds the security promises for arbitrary artifacts that were presented in the in-toto USENIX 19 paper (https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/torres-toto-usenix19.pdf). 
* Kay Williams mentioned the use of purl (package URL - https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) as something to consider as an identifying scheme within ITE-4.
* Aditya is reaching out to Brandon Lum to discuss a use case he is working on in container security to see if ITE-4 might provide a solution.

##### ITE-2 and 3

https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/2/README.adoc
https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/3/README.adoc

* Trishank summarized the issue these ITEs address, and shared the link to a DataDog blog post (https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/secure-publication-of-datadog-agent-integrations-with-tuf-and-in-toto/)that describes the combined use of in-toto and TUF.
* He also recommended considering support for things like HashiCorp Vault (https://www.vaultproject.io/) for industry bootstrapping.

#### Other news

##### **in-toto + rebuilderd and new Rust implementation**

* Santiago announced that there was a new implementation for the Reproducible Builds Community (https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-rs).
* He has an open pull request (https://github.com/kpcyrd/rebuilderd/pull/22) on the rebuilderd repository that generates in-toto link metadata for rebuilder builds.

##### **Signature Wrapper / Signing Spec**

* Aditya described a new effort by the in-toto and TUF teams to extract the signature wrapper used by both projects and release it as a standalone spec.
* This will enable adoption beyond TUF and in-toto metadata.
* He asked the community to share any issues they may have with the current wrapper used in in-toto.
* Kay Williams asked about how this would tie in with the Software Bill of Materials effort (https://www.it-cisq.org/software-bill-of-materials/index.htm).
* Santiago agreed to send out more information on this initiative to those community members who want to get involved.## Roadmaps for 2021 
https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/ROADMAP.md
https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto/blob/develop/ROADMAP.md
* The new roadmap covers August 2020-August 2021 and was published on August 11th.
* The roadmap does NOT include a release announcement of v1.0.0 of the Reference Implementation, as it was decided that a few outstanding issues still needed to be resolved. The plan now is to release version 1.0.0. by the end of the year
* Accomplishments from the last roadmap included work on the Java Implementation and Jenkins plugin.
* Work for the year ahead will be focused on more stable implementations, and will include upgrading from a "Silver" to a "Gold" rating under the Core Infrastructure Initiative's best practices badge. 
* Lastly, the authors look to ensure that the changes outlined in the three current draft ITEs can be integrated with existing technologies.
*  Since ITEs 2 and 3 relate to TUF integration, we will make sure we have a tighter testing harness with co-dependent libraries (e.g., securesystemslib). In addition we will make sure common elements, such as public key components and signatures, can be cross-verifiable by both implementations.

## 04/20/2020 Meeting

### Agenda

* [ITE-2: Using TUF and in-toto to build compromise-resilient CI/CD](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/4)
  * ITE-2 is an informational ITE on how to use TUF for securely  distributing in-toto metadata files and the corresponding software packages.
* [ITE-3: Real-world example of combining TUF and in-toto for packaging Datadog Agent integrations](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/5)
  * ITE-3 is an informational ITE that describes an implementation of the system described in ITE-2 by Datadog. This system is used to distribute Datadog Agent integrations in a compromise-resilient manner.
* [ITE-4: Supporting generic URIs for artifacts in in-toto](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/4/README.adoc)
  * Current Status: ITE-4 has been accepted by the ITE editors as a draft
  * ITE-4 proposes enhancing the in-toto specification to support abstract and/or remote resources as artifacts in the software supply chain.     * Currently, the in-toto specification limits supply chain artifacts (materials and products) to files in the filesystems of the machines involved in the supply chain. ITE-4 primarily defines a URI format to refer to these resources and its behavior in the different parts of the in-toto workflows
  * The ITE authors are seeking feedback from the broader in-toto community and there is currently one [ongoing thread on limiting abstract resources to static entities](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/issues/7)
* [in-toto is now in Grafeas!](https://github.com/grafeas/grafeas/pull/391) in-toto is now a metadata kind in Grafeas and Grafeas instances can be used to store link metadata files.
* The Jenkins in-toto plugin is being updated with more functionality and will soon include support for Grafeas as a transport. The latter is currently a work in progress which can be tracked in this [PR](https://github.com/jenkinsci/in-toto-plugin/pull/10). As the Grafeas in-toto metadata format slightly differs from the standard in-toto format, a translation layer is being implemented in the plugin to perform the necessary conversions.
* Setting up rebuilders:
  * current rebuilder constellation status
  * [rebuilderd](https://github.com/kpcyrd/rebuilderd)

### Attendees
Santiago Torres-Arias, Moderator

Gerard Borst, Justin Cappos, Reza Curtmola, Adrian Diglio, kpcyrd, Trishank Kuppusamy, Joshua Lock, Radu Matei, Bryan Russell, Aditya Sirish, Ralph Squillace, Kate Stewart, Kay Williams

### Notes

#### Update on ITEs

Trishank Kuppusamy and Santiago Torres-Arias  presented progress reports on three in-process ITEs (or in-toto Enhancements). Both ITEs 2 and 3 deal with how to use in-toto in tandem with TUF, with ITE 3 offering a specific use case of how the two programs were implemented together by DataDog. Trishank noted that ITE 2 is also relevant to Cloud Native Application Bundles, which facilitate the bundling, installing and managing of container-native apps, and is used in Microsoft Windows build effort. TUF is used to provide compromise-resilient, transparent distribution and rotation of the in-toto root layout public keys, and consistent snapshots. (Note: ITEs 2 and 3 were merged as drafts on May 5. Comments are invited)
ITE 2 https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/2/README.adoc
ITE 3 https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/3/README.adoc

Santiago reported that ITE 4 (https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/4/README.adoc), which allows generic URI schemes to refer to abstract entities in in-toto metadata, such as GitHub PRs, has been adopted as a draft, but input is still being solicited.The ITE will likely be open for feedback and comments for at least two or three months.

 

#### Updates on Integrations and Implementations

Santiago announced that he will be working on developing an SPDX prototype over the summer.

*Grafeas/Jenkins*
Santiago also reported that [in-toto is now](https://github.com/grafeas/grafeas/pull/391) in Grafeas as a metadata type and Grafeas instances can be used to store link metadata files. The integration includes a Jenkins in-toto plugin that can gather information to be transferred to Grafeas.

Aditya Sirish described a pull request that proposes several changes to the Jenkins plugin, including  “translation layers” that support the necessary conversions from  in-toto formats to Grafeas metadata formats. The work is described [here](https://github.com/jenkinsci/in-toto-plugin/pull/10). Note that since the meeting, this pull request has been merged into the plug-in.
 
Bryan Russell of Google echoed the need to reconcile compatibility and architectural differences to allow in-toto data to be stored in Grafeas. He pointed to Google’s use of protocol buffers, or protobufs as a place where “translation” may be required.

Kay Williams of Microsoft mentioned performance issues as the largest concern and pointed to the need to “unmarshall JSON” as a way to address protobuf compatibility.

*Setting up rebuilders:*
Kpcyrd talked a bit about progress on the rebuilderd project, explaining that rebuilding requires three components, working together--a monitor, a scheduler, and a worker. The rebuilderd  system offers “one-stop shopping” for these tasks.  It allows verification of pre-compiled packages by repeating the build step in an identical environment, and then verifying that the package is identical. https://github.com/kpcyrd/rebuilderd

#### In-toto 1.0.0.--End of the Roadmap

Santiago noted that in-toto had reached the end of its one year Roadmap and asked if anything needed to be tweaked before it moves to 1.0.0. Trishank brought up the issue of parameter substitution, or a way to tell in-toto “I may not know the value of something ahead of time.” He asked if this might be a compatibility issue. Santiago agreed that the issue of parameter substitution should be included in V.1.0.0.

Santiago noted there was a need to make a push for any tooling required for inspection of containers.

*No immediate date was set at the time, but plans for the next meeting are currently being discussed. Look for an announcement soon.*

## 02/24/2020 Meeting

### Agenda

- Update on the ROADMAP[1] progress, and plans for development for the last months of this ROADMAP year.
- Update on ITEs 2, 3 and 4. We think that Specially 4 should start moving [2][3][4]. forward soon, as it will be of particular interest for the OMG/CDF Software Bill of Materials work[5]
- Plans for KubeCon Europe!

[1] https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/7a9bed510dc5e291777cc60b4ba30dd44fc5a6ab/roadmap-reviews/2020/review_2_december_19.md
[2] https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/4
[3] https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/5
[4] https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/6
[5] https://github.com/cdfoundation/sig-security-sbom

### Attendees
Santiago Torres-Arias, Moderator

Gerard Borst, Mynor Cifuentes, Reza Curtmola, Marc Evers, Tobias Furuholm, Jim Gettys, Juan Gomez, Jack Kelly, Jon Knox, Bart Kors, Trishank Kuppusamy, Adam Lewis, Joshua Lock, Andrew Martin, Radu Matei, Lukas Pühringer, Brian Russell, Jennie Steshenko, Aditya Sirish A Yelgundhalli, Lois A DeLong

### Notes

Note: We had some issues during our meeting with faulty acoustics and, as a result, these notes are not as complete as we would like them to be. We apologize for any discussion threads that were inadvertently omitted, or any incorrect statements. Please feel free to help us “fill in the gaps” by sharing on the thread.  We will come up with a more reliable technology for our next meeting.

#### Roadmap

Santiago brought the group up to date on progress towards in-toto V. 1.0.0, which is scheduled for completion in April 2020. This included work on cross-implementation interoperability for in-toto golang and work with Debian to test the reproducibility of packages. The current progress report on the Roadmap can be found at 

https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/roadmap-reviews/2020/review_1_august_19.md, and

https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/roadmap-reviews/2020/review_2_december_19.md. 

Lukas talked about the remaining tasks for the v1.0.0 release of the reference implementation, which boil down to setting in stone a stable API and generating library documentation.

##### Deployments

Gerard Borst and Bart Kors from Rabobank, who have created a fork of in-toto called Argos Supply Chain Notary, described their ongoing progress with the system. This included a change to the layout and link metadata format with the goal of making it more JSON compatible, the addition of an expected final product field in the layout, and the removal of inspections.

https://github.com/rabobank/argos

##### ITE 4

Aditya talked briefly about his work on ITE 4, which allows generic URI schemes to refer to abstract entities in in-toto metadata, such as GitHub PRs (see https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/6).  He invited everyone to review and comment on the PR, which is relevant for collaborations with SPDX (Source Package Data Exchange) and GitHub.

##### in-toto jenkins plugin

Aditya also mentioned preparing a demo that uses the in-toto Jenkins plugin to publish attestations for the steps of a web app build pipeline in a Grafeas store, performing final product verification in an in-toto Kubernetes admission controller 

(Note: Parts of that demo have been presented by Mark Russinovich, CTO of Microsoft Azure, at RSA Conference https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tHwLCDrs1zQ&feature=youtu.be&t=2597)

##### Other Issues

There was some discussion about moving to a different meeting technology as this Zoom technology had issues, particularly with accessibility and background noise.

Lukas and Justin will attend KubeCon and each is scheduled to do a talk. 

(Note: KubeCon Europe was postponed to July/August due to COVID-19)

There was a general consensus that posting on the in-toto mailing list might be the best way to initiate discussions of concern to the community. These discussions could then be moved to GitHub in the form of issues or pull requests as warranted.
