# in-toto Community Meetings 2021

## 12/03/2021 Meeting

### Agenda

* ITE-2 up for acceptance
    * We should perhaps set a date for comments, and allow ITE editors to make a decision
    * https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/issues/26
* ITE-6 updates
    * Discussing code review (crev project) and SPDX attestations
    * Exploring the idea of a generic "review" attestation to derive from for CRs, vulnerability scans and so on
(https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/predicates/spdx.md)
* TestifySec

### Attendees
* Aditya Sirish (NYU)
* Mark Lodato (Google)
* Cole Kennedy (TestifySec)
* Mikhail Swift (TestifySec)
* Andres Torres (VMWare)
* Lois Anne DeLong (NYU)
* Tom Hennen (Google)
* Santiago Torres Arias (Purdue)
* Marcela Melara (Intel)

### Notes

#### ITE 2 

* It was proposed that a date should be set for comments on this issue, and that ITE editors should go ahead and make a decision
* The issue has been around since 2019.
* Are there any stumbling blocks to acceptance? If so they can be presented here https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/issues/26

#### ITE 6
https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/6/README.md
*  This ITE "defines a new schema for in-toto link files, which are now generally called 'attestations.'' The proposed ITE "allows users to define their own custom 'predicates' with arbitrary schemas. This makes it easier and more natural to express any type of metadata about software."
*  Currently looking into the idea of a generic "review" attestation that can be derived from CRs, vulnerability scans and so on
*  There was discussion about the code review (crev project) and SPDX attestations
* Discussion of how in-toto attestations can work more effectively as SBOMs. See https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/predicates/spdx.md

#### Witness
* in-toto implementation that includes ITE 5 and 6
* Git information about commits etc. can be saved as attestations
* Makes it possible to track particular statements/commits.
* All Open source
* Looking to release it after the first of the year.
* Can do multiple predicates signed as a unit
https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/bundle.md
* Proposal to create an issue to discuss this further.
* Rekor materials should be available as a demo shortly
* Policy is essentially the same as in-toto.
* Schema of the output is directly tied to the tool that created it.

#### Next Meeting
* January 7?

## 11/05/2021 Meeting

### Agenda
* Meta (not that one)
    * Plan to make meetings regular, likely every four weeks / first friday of every month
* Two ITEs since last meeting 
    * [ITE-3](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/3/README.adoc)
    * [ITE-5](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/5/README.adoc)
* [ITE-2](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/2/README.adoc) up for [acceptance](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/issues/26)
* ITE-6 / in-toto Attestation updates
    * Mention type usage, and possible new additions (e.g., hardware root of trust, sgx workload attestation, etc.)
* ITE-7
    * Certificate semantics, enables SPIFFE integration
    * in-toto-golang includes support, courtesy of BoxBoat / IBM contributors
* ITE-8
    * Proposal to create a library for in-toto layouts / policies
* in-toto-java refactored
    * Adds DSSE support
    * https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-java/pull/24 merged!
    * 0.4.0 will be cut soon

### Attendees
* Aditya Sirish (NYU)
* Tom Hennen (Google)
* Andres Torres (VMWare)
* Lois Anne DeLong (NYU)
* Mikhail Swift (TestifySec)
* Lukas Puehringer (NYU)
* Santiago Torres-Arias (Purdue)
* Joy Liu (UPenn, in-toto GSoC 2021)
* Mic Bowman (Intel)
* Reza Curtmola (NJIT)
* Mark Lodato (Google)
* Parth Patel (BoxBoat)
* Dan Chernoff (Contino)
* Sergio Felix (Google)
* Andy Martin (ControlPlane)
* Marcela Melara (Intel)
* Hammad Afzali (Microsoft)

### Notes

#### Meeting Frequency
* Meetings will be held the first Friday of every month
* Next meeting: December 3

#### ITE Updates
Discussions and status quo updates on existing ITEs

##### [ITE-2](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/2/README.adoc) up for [acceptance](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/issues/26)
*  Proposes a compromise-resilient way to securely distribute, revoke, and replace the public keys used to verify the in-toto layout. 
*  To do so, it integrates TUF to "add to the repository a higher layer of signed metadata."" 

##### [ITE-3](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/3/README.adoc)
 * Accepted.
 * Details Datadog's integration of TUF and in-toto
##### [ITE-5](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/5/README.adoc)
* This would divorce the signature mechanism from the in-toto specification, enabling adopters to generate in-toto metadata using other formats, perhaps in wireline formats they already support.
* Accepted.

##### ITE-6 / in-toto Attestation updates
* This ITE "defines a new schema for in-toto link files, which are now generally called 'attestations.'' An attestation is authenticated metadata about one or more software artifacts. Instead of a fixed schema (materials, products, command, etc.), the attestation format allows users to define their own custom 'predicates' with arbitrary schemas."
* One Example: SLSA Provenance (https://slsa.dev/provenance), a claim that some entity (builder) produced one or more software artifacts (Statement’s subject) by executing some recipe, using some other artifacts as input (materials). 
* Current model in ITE-6 offers three distinct layers each representing trust in different things. Is there some way to be less rigid as to what goes into these layers?
* https://openssf.org/blog/2020/11/06/security-scorecards-for-open-source-projects/
* https://github.com/ossf/scorecard
* Mention type usage, and possible new additions (e.g., hardware root of trust, sgx workload attestation, etc.)
* Hardware root of trust would have some proof that it came from trusted hardware. 
* Can we build stronger trust in the builder, as opposed to the hardware?
* See short whitepaper from Intel on high-integrity SW supply chain work: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09843
Published at this summer's NIST Workshop on SW Supply Chain Security. 

##### ITE-7

* Certificate semantics enables SPIFFE integration
* in-toto-golang includes support, courtesy of BoxBoat / IBM contributors
* Spire PR for review - 
https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang/pull/147
* Current implementation in SPIRE the signing keys is verified through the SPIRE server. It means the user no longer needs to worry about the keys themselves
* The ITE could use more reviews on the Pull Request to see how it might work in other applications.
* A note about the process...ITEs often linger too long before becoming drafts.  Is there a way to get to draft quicker and iterate from there?
    
##### ITE-8
* This proposes creation of a library for in-toto layouts and policies
* Opened as a PR, no text has been merged as draft as of yet.
* This could be a Google Summer of Code project for next year.

#### in-toto Java implementation
* in-toto-java refactored
    * Adds DSSE support
    * https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-java/pull/24 merged!
    * 0.4.0 will be cut soon
* Sergio Felix will be joining the team as a maintainer of in-toto-java

## 08/27/2021 Meeting

### Agenda
* Roadmap Reviews to close final 2021 evaluation period
    * [in-toto/docs review](https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/roadmap-reviews/2021/review_3_july_21.md)
    * [in-toto/in-toto review](https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto/blob/develop/roadmap-reviews/2021/review_3_july_21.md)
* New Roadmap
    * https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/ROADMAP.md
* Google Summer of Code
    * Joy Liu
    * https://crates.io/crates/in-toto/0.1.1
    * rebuilderd can now generate in-toto links!
    * https://github.com/kpcyrd/rebuilderd/pull/65
* ITE-5 and DSSE
    * https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/5/README.md
    * https://github.com/secure-systems-lab/dsse
    * https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/issues/22
* ITE-6 and in-toto Attestation
    * https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/6/README.md
    * https://github.com/in-toto/attestation
* ITE-7 by BoxBoat
    * Mikhail Swift
    * https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/21
    * https://github.com/boxboat/in-toto-golang
* SCIM Collaboration
    * Kay Williams
    * https://github.com/microsoft/scim
* Refactoring of in-toto-java
    * https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-java/issues/23

### Attendees
* Aditya Sirish (NYU)
* Cole Kennedy (TestifySec)
* Reza Curtmola (NJIT)
* Sangat Singh Vaidya (NJIT)
* Mikhail Swift (Boxboat)
* kpcyrd (Reproducible Builds / rebuilderd)
* Sebastien Awwad (Conda)
* Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy (Datadog)
* Christian Rebischke (Arch Linux / in-toto)
* Kay Williams (Microsoft)
* Santiago Torres-Arias (Purdue)
* Joy Liu (GSoC / in-toto)
* D Niu (Datadog)
* Wiktor Kozlik (Google)
* Tom Hennen (Google)
* Sergio Felix (Google)

### Notes

#### New roadmap

* in-toto's next roadmap primarily looks at progress in the context of the different ITEs that have been proposed

#### GSoC Report

* Joy discussed her work on in-toto-rs to add in-toto-run functionality
* Mentioned open PR for rebuilderd integration
* Santiago provided more context to the community about what rebuilderd does and kpcyrd's work in the space
* Mentioned that future work on the in-toto space includes work on the apt transport

#### ITE-5

* Santiago provided an overview of what ITE-5 / DSSE are
* The backward compatibility discussion: Trishank and Santiago discussed some points about how to transition from the old wrapper to DSSE on the reference implementation
* Route to acceptance thread open for another 2-3 weeks

#### Minor Diversion: GitHub vs Mailing List

* Developers may be more comfortable using GitHub for ITE-related discussions over the mailing list

#### ITE-6

* Allows for specific types for attestations
* Used by SLSA for provenance
* Want to include proof of reproducibility, SBoMs etc
* A process for people to submit attestation types
* Santiago went over the idea of ITE-6, and the differences between the new style attestations and current links and layouts
* Also currently used by Tekton Chains
* Some discussion about vuln scans as a type
* Still a WIP
* Some folks want to use their own policy engine with these attestations
* Possibly in-toto verification module for OPA
* How do in-toto layouts verify attestations?
    * Under discussion, via inspections possibly

#### ITE-7

* Mikhail described ITE-7's addition of PKI support to in-toto
* Mikhail also gave an overview of what SPIFFE does
* One PR: https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang/pull/119/
* Two more coming: adds CLI, adds SPIFFE integration

#### SCIM Collaboration

* Kay Williams presented about the overlap of SCIM and in-toto
* SCIM = Supply Chain Integrity Model

## 04/22/2021 Meeting

### Agenda
* Roadmap Reviews for evaluation period ending in April 2021
* Release of in-toto v1.1 at the end of April 2021
* SPIRE integration with in-toto-golang (Cole Kennedy of BoxBoat)
* Integration of in-toto with Clair
* ITE-6
* SigStore support for ITE-6 enabled rekor types
* ITE-5, release of Signing Spec v0.1.0 and roadmap to v1.0

### Attendees
* Hammad Afzali (NJIT)
* Yuanrui Chen (NYU)
* Dan Chernoff
* Reza Curtmola (NJIT)
* Chris Erway (Solarwinds)
* Trishank Kuppusamy (Datadog)
* Joy Liu (UPenn)
* Joshua Locke (VMWare)
* Mark Lodato (Google)
* Andy Martin (ControlPlane)
* Frederic Pierrat (QubesOS)
* Christian Rebischke
* Trevor Rosen
* Tom van Shwerdiner
* Aditya Sirish (NYU)
* Santiago Torres-Arias (Purdue)
* Sangat Vaidya (NJIT)
* Kate Stewart (SPDX)
* Carlos

### Notes

#### Roadmap Reviews for evaluation period ending in April 2021 and 
* Aditya Sirish committed the latest draft of this document a few days ago. It reviews activities from January to April 2021, which includes the release of a patch 1.0.1 release of the Reference Implementation. This is the final release offering support for Python 2.
* The review also points to progress on ITEs 5 and 6, 

#### Release of in-toto v1.1 at the end of April 2021

#### SPIRE integration with in-toto-golang (Cole Kennedy of BoxBoat)
This discussion was postponed because the responsible people could not be with us.

#### ITE-6
https://github.com/in-toto/attestation
* ITE-6 defines the in-toto attestation format, which represents authenticated metadata about a set of software artifacts. Attestations are intended for consumption by automated policy engines, such as in-toto and Binary Authorization.
* 
* Mark Lodato a change ITE-6 to say "use this new attestation format"
* A 0.1 release will be labeled next week, so that we can refer to specific versions

#### SigStore support for ITE-6 enabled rekor types
* Provide support for rekor types which helps to support a broad signature space.
* Was presented as a project for people who might be interested in getting involved with the in-toto projects

#### ITE-5
* Proposes switching to a new signature envelope in in-toto, namely the SSL Signing Spec. Instead ofwhich can now only focus on describing in-toto specifics, rather than cryptographic building blocks.
* Merged as a draft earlier this week
* Chris Erway reported on a colleague's WIP ITE-5 implementation at https://github.com/solarwinds/in-toto-golang/pull/2, noting that the implementation will depend on the envelope structure defined in the ITE-6 PR. He mentioned that the envelope could be moved to the ITE-5 PR if that makes more sense. 

#### Other questions/comments

* A question was raised about timelines for acceptance of ITE 5 and 6 as V.1.0. The response was that both had been accepted as drafts (Lois: Is this true? ITE 6 is not listed on the master ITE page.)
* Frederic Pierret of QubesOS shared an update on his rebuilder project (https://github.com/fepitre/debian-snapshot-mirror)

## 02/11/2021 Meeting

### Agenda

* First release of in-toto-golang 
    * https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang/releases/tag/v0.1.0
* Roadmap Reviews for end of December 2020
    * https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto/blob/develop/roadmap-reviews/2021/review_1_december_20.md
    * https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/roadmap-reviews/2021/review_1_december_20.md
* Updates about Signing Spec and ITE-5
    * https://github.com/secure-systems-lab/signing-spec
    * https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/13/
* ITE-6
    * https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/15
* SPIRE integration with in-toto-golang (Cole Kennedy of BoxBoat)
* NYU Reproducible Builds Rebuilder
    * https://r-b.engineering.nyu.edu

* Python 2.7 support in reference implementation
* Grafeas + in-toto
    * https://github.com/in-toto/totoify-grafeas/pull/3
    * https://github.com/in-toto/totoify-grafeas/pull/4

### Attendees
* Aditya Sirish (NYU)
* Lois Anne DeLong (NYU)
* Frédéric Pierret (QubesOS)
* Santiago Torres-Arias (Purdue)
* Yuanrui Chen (NYU)
* James Higgins-Thomas (Fiserv)
* Gerard Borst (Rabobank)
* kpcyrd (rebuilderd / Arch Linux)
* Andy Martin (ControlPlane)
* Lukas Pühringer (NYU)
* Wiktor Kozlik (Google)
* Trishank Kuppusamy (Datadog)
* Mark Lodato (Google)
* Jim Gettys
* Fredrik Skogman
* Nenad Dedic (Google)
* Chris Erway (SolarWinds)
* jk (?)
* Cole Kennedy (BoxBoat)
* Mikhail Swift (BoxBoat)
* Kate Stewart (SPDX)

### Notes

First release of in-toto-golang
https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang/releases/tag/v0.1.0

* In process for about three years
* Google Summer of Code student worked on it last summer
* Pre-release version has been posted.
* Used by kubesec:
    * Inital version in Cloudrun on GCP. 
    * Can do initscripts that will not lock it into one application
    * Sits in the GitHub market as an action 

#### Roadmap Reviews for end of December 2020

[reference implementation review](https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto/blob/develop/roadmap-reviews/2021/review_1_december_20.md), [org review](https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/roadmap-reviews/2021/review_1_december_20.md)
    
* Released in the middle of January, based on activity status in December.
* A lot of activity on the ITE front, particularly ITE 5 and 6
* Also information on status Grafeas. Put together a tool that can store in-toto data on Grafeas implementation
* The tool has been released
* For the reference implementation--stable 1.0.0 release completed
* Have a tool that can generate in-toto layouts recently released I missed that we've been improving our layout creation tools since the summer. The improvements we've made were deployed to in-toto.engineering.nyu.edu

#### Updates about Signing Spec and ITE-5
* python-securesystemlib not in a stable state to port to Golang yet
* Perhaps initially do this in Python before implementing it in other languages, or develop in go based on signing-spec, indepentently of python-securesystemslib
* signing-spec is actually very simple: How do you sign a blob generically

#### ITE-6
https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/pull/15
* Specifics are not fully settled yet, including the actual mechanisms
* Introduces "ad hoc semantics"
* Keeps generic links for agility
* Accomodates both generic links and ad-hoc
* Extending a requests for ideas and comments
* Impt goal--that it not be "in-toto specific"...aiming for more of a standard than a specific "in-toto" approach
* Implementations? 
* Can perhaps adopt existing programs?
* Perhaps develop a "plug-in" system for these specs?
* "a minimum specification"
* Still in early stages, so its a 

#### NYU Reproducible Builds Rebuilder
https://r-b.engineering.nyu.edu
* Santiago wants to host a version at Purdue
* Does anyone else in the community want to comment? Now is a good time to do so

#### Qubes Rebuilder
https://github.com/fepitre/package-rebuilder
https://github.com/fepitre/rpmreproduce

#### SPIRE integration with in-toto-golang (Cole Kennedy of BoxBoat)
* Agent that sits on the machine and notes what processes are making the call. 
* Through a backend process, it can identify and find the correct certificate
* Generates an entity and signing keys for ephemeral elements
* Using in-toto requires a complicated key management SPIFFE/SPIRE simplifies the process
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3161

#### Links in comments

* https://r-b.engineering.nyu.edu
* We can generate json/openAPI schema from protobuf https://github.com/secure-systems-lab/signing-spec/issues/18
